Um, so Anna,
you're one of my favorite reporters in the world in terms of just
seeing what's out there. Uh, and I can sense the pain,
um, in, in your voice, when you think about what is going on out there, um,
where it's your job to actually talk to people and make
sense of the data.
So as an economics reporter right now,
how do you figure out just how bad the damage is?
It's? Um, it's pretty hard. This is a really unusual recession. Um,
it happened really fast.
It was this kind of induced recession for public health reasons.
So we had this kind of soft,
I don't want to call it a lockdown cause we never really locked down,
but this sort of withdrawal of business activity that was driven,
not by the federal government,
but by state and local governments and really largely by people,
themselves being like, I don't want COVID,
I don't want to spread COVID I'm going to stay home. And,
and you had a pretty impressive, I was,
I was pleasantly surprised at the cares act,
how big it was and how aggressive it was. Um,
but we proceeded to do nothing on the public health front, um,
at a federal level. And you know,
we're nearing 200,000 people dead and now we've had this really dramatic
withdrawal of support.
So PPP is over while businesses are still struggling. Um,
the $600 boost is gone in UI. So that's taking,
I believe it's like $60 billion out of the economy every month.
And that's from tends to be disproportionately lower income families who are
quite likely to spend it. And so I feel like we're a little bit in that, um,
in that circumstance where like, you know,
the coyote runs off of the cliff and just is suspended in air for a minute.
Um, yeah, it was August.
And I feel like gravity is now going to kick in.
Yeah. And we still, you know, we have these eviction, moratoria, we've not seen,
um, a ton of evidence of a D sharp decline in consumer spending,
but that's certainly coming. And so it's pretty hard,
but you talk to people and people are really frightened
and things are really bad.
And we are seeing exactly what everybody thought,
which is mass business failure.
And that mass business failure is going to be the thing that will turn this into
something like a depression.
Cause like when your business shuts down for no good reason, um,
your employees get laid off, you go through a bankruptcy process. Um, you know,
you have some wealth affected. It has that, that, that knock on effect.
And so I'm, I'm really worried. This is, this is really bad.
And I think it's going to take quite some time to claw our way out of this.
Um, and I think other countries have certainly done better on the health front.
I think that they've also done better on the econ front. Um,
and the fact that we never really got control of the is, you know, culprit,
it is the alpha and Omega of why everything is terrible at the moment.
Yeah.
You referenced the fact that people are going to make the choices they made. Um,
and it's one of the things I find so frustrating about some of the discussions
that if a governor or the feds make a
decision about businesses in a locality or travel restrictions or the
lack thereof,
there are still going to be millions of Americans who just look up and say,
you know what? I don't think I am going to take that trip.
I don't think I am going to go to that restaurant.
I don't think I am necessarily, uh, going to, uh,
uh, hit the bar or the movie theater or whatnot. Uh, and,
and so that set of choices,
we'll just have these long lasting ripple effects for as long as the virus
is out of control. Uh, and as someone who's run businesses myself,
you know, right now your appetite for, uh,
or risk expansion expenses is so negative right
now that I can see how that's just going to cascade through the economy when
people start thinking, okay,
like I've given it a little bit of time and now I'm going to have to actually
start making the difficult decisions, the layoffs, the adjustments.
Yeah. I think that that's right. Um, you know,
if you just take the kind of capital investment portion of the economy,
the hit there alone is probably enough to reduce output
over a course of, of years. Um,
how are businesses supposed to plan for the future?
If the virus is still spreading and schools are,
she'll still shut down and everybody's still really afraid of this. And,
and you know,
now we're coming into flu season and people are going to be indoors. Um, it's,
it's a really impossible situation that we've put people in. And, you know,
and, and I think that this is, um, the,
the catastrophe is being born on the back of service workers,
low-income workers in general. Um, you know, and in terms of the,
the really negative stuff on the horizon,
we knew that there was going to be huge problems with state and local spending
lo and behold,
we're starting to see those layoffs and those pay cuts come through. Um,
so that's just buying us a longer recession.
And it's really frustrating because I think a lot of the issues here are
amenable to policy solutions.
And we are not both both Congress and the white house are just electing not to,
not to rely on those solutions. Um, and this is, this is going to be,
this is so bad.
And I felt like we had learned some lessons from the great recession in terms of
just spending your way out of it and just not stopping until you,
you saw wage growth down in the bottom of the income spectrum and,
um, uh, and employment growth kind of across, across, um,
educational bands and in different racial groups in all over the country. And,
you know, it's just, we, we, we didn't really learn those lessons. Um, and,
and so this is, this is a real, it's a mess. Um, and again, I think that,
that the data is not caught up to people's lived experience just in terms of how
bad this is, right.
Um, one of the stats that I cited in my DNC speech,
which I think really is very powerful and telling is that approximately
42% of the jobs that are being lost right now will not return.
And I,
one reason why I hit that point so hard is that there are a lot of people I
think, that are waiting for things to quote unquote, go back to normal.
And we need to get used to the fact that what we're seeing right now is actually
closer to the whatever new normal is going to be.
Yeah, absolutely. So, I mean, I feel like, um,
one thing that is happening is that the kind of critical number for
Congress, um,
for the federal government is not that sort of top-line how much money are you
spending, right? It's, it's this gap,
it's the gap between what the economy could be doing, um,
absent the pandemic and the shutdowns, um, and, and what it is doing.
And you need the federal government to fill that hole. However, big the hole is,
right? Like this is the whole notion of Kinsey and stimulus.
And so, you know.
So how big is the whole Andy? Like, how big,
how much do you think puts you think they should be filling?
Yeah. I don't think that 3 trillion, which is, um,
the number that they settled on and the heroes act is, is that far off,
even though they've already spent the 2.2 trillion in the cares act,
it doesn't matter. They need to spend whatever it is. Um, we'll,
we'll bring that, that, that overall number up and they can,
they can do it in the most effective way possible. So, so, um,
we have really good measurements of this thing called the fiscal multiplier,
which is for every dollar of deficit spending,
how much more does that dollar get spent in the economy,
or how big is the impact of it?
And so you do something like tax cuts, it's a pretty small impact.
You do something like sending people with no cash cash,
and it's a really big impact.
So unemployment insurance is one of the most effective ways to do this. Um,
just sending people, cash is a great way to do it.
Things like payroll tax holidays are really bad and inefficient way to do it.
So you need the number to be really big,
and you want it to be weighted to things that are heavily effective at fighting
a recession.
And instead Congress is just like sitting on their hands and not doing anything.
And, and we are going to see evictions. We are going to see job losses.
We are going to see business closures. We are already seeing them.
This is happening and we know why it's happening.
And we are seeing it happen in real time.
And the time that they needed to start passing the stimulus was like months ago,
not, not now.
And we still don't have the bill and it's creating tremendous uncertainty as you
point out because what, what,
what business owner is going to be investing right now,
who is sure of the future,
if the future is involving this much unnecessary death and economic
destruction?
No, th th th I can sense your frustration.
I'm frustrated so many people listening to this to have, uh, become,
just fed up with our, uh,
leaders inability to act and do the basics. Uh,
and there's the pandemic which we are handling terribly. Uh,
I think that that's pretty clear to most everyone. Um,
and then there's the compounded economic damage,
which we are also handling terribly. And like these two things together,
they, they make people. So, um, distraught, I mean,
I I'm distraught and angry over this state of affairs.
Um, and, and your side too. I mean,
I read your work and I can feel like there is this beating heart,
and I'm an agenda behind, um,
the urgency you're trying to heighten over the level of economic
distress.
Yeah, absolutely. Um, this is, this is a crisis. Um,
and I have some, I don't know why,
um,
the sense that it is a crisis and we should be acting
with absolute urgency is not necessarily something that,
that all people in the political system share.
I certainly think that many do and are screaming their heads off and banging
their heads against the wall, um, to try to get things done. Um,
but I do think that it's an argument for, um,
having more automatic stabilizers and taking, uh,
responsibility out of the hands of Congress, which is a very,
very broken institution. I also, I mean,
I have a theory that I, it's just a theory, um,
and I have no evidence for this, but this recession,
the pain of this recession has been so concentrated among lower income
workers who tend to be more disenfranchised in our political process.
Um, we've already seen wealth recover to roughly where it was, um,
before the recession and the pandemic,
and just a lot of the economic pain hasn't been focused up at the top.
And I do worry that that's maybe part of what's going on here is, you know,
the unemployment rate for people who were making a lot of money before are
highly educated is actually not that high it's gone up, but, but, but, um,
it's been much, much, much, much higher for kind of service workers,
workers who might happen to have less education, um,
or who might have been sort of marginalized in the economy for a bunch of other
reasons to begin with. Um, and I feel like, you know, um,
for high-income folks,
this is now become about the issue of what do you do with your kids,
which is a really, really stressful and important issue. But, um,
the disproportionate burden of,
of the health crisis and the economic crisis is, is really being, um,
born by the people with the least capacity to manage it.
For listening in. I hope you enjoyed this conversation. If you did,
please do subscribe to.
Yang, speaks and click on notifications so we can let you know,
every time we have a new episode.